Now that you've had
a chance to talk
through several variants of the
search stream gang case study,
search with parallel
streams, and search
with parallel spliterators,
let's go ahead
and talk about a broader,
more important issue--
when to use Java
parallel streams
and when not to use them.
We'll start by discussing
when to use parallel streams.
It's important to recognize that
parallelism is not a panacea.
In particular, a parallel
program always does more work
than a nonparallel program.
For example, a
parallel program needs
to partition the overall
task to be performed
into various subtasks.
We see how things
like spliterators
are used to do that with
Java parallel streams.
It then needs take the chunks
produced from the splitting
phase and apply them to
process all the subtasks.
This step is typically all
that a sequential program does.
It just does the processing.
And then third, it needs
to combine the results
from the various subtasks
into a final reduced result.
Step number one and
step number three
are additional work
that needn't be
done by a sequential program.
Therefore, there
better darn well
be a benefit from
doing this in parallel.
Otherwise, we're going to swamp
ourselves with this splitting
and combining cost.
So therefore, you have to
think through carefully
whether it makes sense
to use parallel streams
or not, and that's because
previous streams are
useful in some, but by
no means all, conditions.
So let's talk about when
to use parallel streams.
Parallel streams are most
useful under certain conditions.
One set of conditions
are when behaviors--
the processing that takes place,
for example, in a Java Stream--
have certain characteristics.
One, they're independent.
The processing tasks
are going to work best
if they have little or no
dependencies between each other
and no need to communicate or
share results between them.
If tasks have those
properties, we typically
call them
embarrassingly parallel.
And I've used this
example multiple times
now of going to the laundromat
and washing all your clothes
in a bank of washers and
drying all your clothes
in a bank of dryers, and the
nice thing about that is they
don't depend on each other and
they can just run in parallel.
You'll probably spend a lot of
quarters, if you're in the US,
but you'll get things done and
you'll get it done quickly.
We've shown a number
of examples that
fit this bill quite nicely.
For example,
searching for phrases
in a list of input strings--
the works of Shakespeare,
or the song lyrics,
or whatever you want to do--
those are all things
where the tasks
are fundamentally independent.
For example, we use
parallel streams
to search for each
phrase in parallel,
search for each input
string in parallel,
and search for chunks in each
input string in parallel.
So we had different variants
that did those things.
And as we saw, the search with
parallel spliterator example
is the most aggressive approach
and it tends to work the best.
Another characteristic
that lends itself
nicely to parallelization is
how computationally expensive
the processing is
done on each element.
When the behaviors are
applied to each element
take a long time to run, we're
likely to see better results
from throwing parallel
processing at the problem.
Another related
dimension is how many
elements are going
to be processed
as part of the data sources?
Again, if you have lots
of elements to process,
then parallelism is often
a win, whereas if you only
have a handful, it's
probably overkill.
You'll get swamped by
splitting and combining costs.
As we've seen a number of
times and have demonstrated
empirically through
some tests, parallelism
works best in the Streams
model when the sources of input
can be split evenly
and efficiently.
Ideally, split in half.
So if you take
these two elements--
computationally expensive
and applied to many elements
of the data sources--
we end up with something
called the N times Q model,
or the NQ model,
which is described
in a number of places, this
link being one of them.
In this model, N is the
number of data elements
that are going to be
processed, either per thread
or for the whole
multicore platform.
And Q is a quantification of
how CPU-intensive the processing
is.
So as shown by this
little chart here,
the larger N is and
the higher Q is,
that's the ideal for
doing parallel processing.
In contrast, if you
have low N and low
Q, probably not worth it.
And there's some break
even point somewhere.
You'd probably be well
advised to search for it
by doing some empirical tests.
Brian Getz likes to say,
if N times Q equals 10,000,
then you're probably better
off using a parallel stream.
I'm not sure if 10,000 is
quite exactly the right number,
but it's just a good heuristic
to say as it gets bigger,
you're going to get a better win
from using parallel computing.
We saw this, where
we were searching
for phrases that match in
the works of Shakespeare.
So the searching was fairly
computationally expensive.
Searching the input
strings to find
matches with regular
expressions take some time.
And we had lots of
things to search,
lots of works of Shakespeare.
Of course, even there, you
can imagine lots of data sets
would have way more
than 38 elements in them
and we'd be doing even more
intense processing than just
searching texts to try to
find regular expression
pattern matches.
Another condition, of course,
that we need to mention
is are there multiple cores?
If you have only a
single-core processor,
then things may work--
because obviously, multiple
threads can be multiplexed over
a single core by the underlying
operating system kernel
and operating system scheduler--
but you're very unlikely to see
much of a win in
terms of performance,
unless you have
highly I/O-bound jobs.
The good news is
pretty much everything
these days is going
to be multicore,
so it's pretty hard to buy
a single-core computer.
So the good news here is that
by leveraging today's commodity
quad-core, octa-core, and
so on computing platforms,
you're probably going to get
a relatively good speed up as
long as all these different
conditions are met.
Under the right conditions, we
saw that Java parallel streams
scale up very well on
multicore processors,
and you can see here
that, certainly compared
to the sequential stream version
or even the sequential loops
version that we also looked
at, the parallel streams
and parallel spliterator
implementations
are substantially,
substantially faster.